Mechanistic determinants of bacterial growth, death, and spread within mammalian hosts
          cannot be fully resolved studying a single bacterial population. They are also currently
          poorly understood. Here, we report on the application of sophisticated experimental
          approaches to map spatiotemporal population dynamics of bacteria during an infection. We
          analyzed heterogeneous traits of simultaneous infections with tagged Salmonella
            enterica populations (wild-type isogenic tagged strains
          [WITS]) in wild-type and gene-targeted mice. WITS are phenotypically
          identical but can be distinguished and enumerated by quantitative PCR, making it possible,
          using probabilistic models, to estimate bacterial death rate based on the disappearance of
          strains through time. This multidisciplinary approach allowed us to establish the timing,
          relative occurrence, and immune control of key infection parameters in a true
          host–pathogen combination. Our analyses support a model in which shortly after
          infection, concomitant death and rapid bacterial replication lead to the establishment of
          independent bacterial subpopulations in different organs, a process controlled by host
          antimicrobial mechanisms. Later, decreased microbial mortality leads to an exponential
          increase in the number of bacteria that spread locally, with subsequent mixing of bacteria
          between organs via bacteraemia and further stochastic selection. This approach provides us
          with an unprecedented outlook on the pathogenesis of S. enterica infections, illustrating the
          complex spatial and stochastic effects that drive an infectious disease. The application
          of the novel method that we present in appropriate and diverse host–pathogen
          combinations, together with modelling of the data that result, will facilitate a
          comprehensive view of the spatial and stochastic nature of within-host dynamics.
