Non-recombining sex chromosomes are expected to undergo evolutionary decay,
                    ending up genetically degenerated, as has happened in birds and mammals. Why are
                    then sex chromosomes so often homomorphic in cold-blooded vertebrates? One
                    possible explanation is a high rate of turnover events, replacing master
                    sex-determining genes by new ones on other chromosomes. An alternative is that
                    X-Y similarity is maintained by occasional recombination events, occurring in
                    sex-reversed XY females. Based on mitochondrial and nuclear gene sequences, we
                    estimated the divergence times between European tree frogs (Hyla
                        arborea, H. intermedia, and H.
                        molleri) to the upper Miocene, about 5.4–7.1 million years
                    ago. Sibship analyses of microsatellite polymorphisms revealed that all three
                    species have the same pair of sex chromosomes, with complete absence of X-Y
                    recombination in males. Despite this, sequences of sex-linked loci show no
                    divergence between the X and Y chromosomes. In the phylogeny, the X and Y
                    alleles cluster according to species, not in groups of gametologs. We conclude
                    that sex-chromosome homomorphy in these tree frogs does not result from a recent
                    turnover but is maintained over evolutionary timescales by occasional X-Y
                    recombination. Seemingly young sex chromosomes may thus carry old-established
                    sex-determining genes, a result at odds with the view that sex chromosomes
                    necessarily decay until they are replaced. This raises intriguing perspectives
                    regarding the evolutionary dynamics of sexually antagonistic genes and the
                    mechanisms that control X-Y recombination.
