Metagenomics projects based on shotgun sequencing of populations of micro-organisms yield
          insight into protein families. We used sequence similarity clustering to explore proteins
          with a comprehensive dataset consisting of sequences from available databases together
          with 6.12 million proteins predicted from an assembly of 7.7 million Global Ocean Sampling
          (GOS) sequences. The GOS dataset covers nearly all known prokaryotic protein families. A
          total of 3,995 medium- and large-sized clusters consisting of only GOS sequences are
          identified, out of which 1,700 have no detectable homology to known families. The GOS-only
          clusters contain a higher than expected proportion of sequences of viral origin, thus
          reflecting a poor sampling of viral diversity until now. Protein domain distributions in
          the GOS dataset and current protein databases show distinct biases. Several protein
          domains that were previously categorized as kingdom specific are shown to have GOS
          examples in other kingdoms. About 6,000 sequences (ORFans) from the literature that
          heretofore lacked similarity to known proteins have matches in the GOS data. The GOS
          dataset is also used to improve remote homology detection. Overall, besides nearly
          doubling the number of current proteins, the predicted GOS proteins also add a great deal
          of diversity to known protein families and shed light on their evolution. These
          observations are illustrated using several protein families, including phosphatases,
          proteases, ultraviolet-irradiation DNA damage repair enzymes, glutamine synthetase, and
          RuBisCO. The diversity added by GOS data has implications for choosing targets for
          experimental structure characterization as part of structural genomics efforts. Our
          analysis indicates that new families are being discovered at a rate that is linear or
          almost linear with the addition of new sequences, implying that we are still far from
          discovering all protein families in nature.
