The world's oceans contain a complex mixture of micro-organisms that are for the most
          part, uncharacterized both genetically and biochemically. We report here a metagenomic
          study of the marine planktonic microbiota in which surface (mostly marine) water samples
          were analyzed as part of the Sorcerer II Global Ocean Sampling
          expedition. These samples, collected across a several-thousand km transect from the North
          Atlantic through the Panama Canal and ending in the South Pacific yielded an extensive
          dataset consisting of 7.7 million sequencing reads (6.3 billion bp). Though a few major
          microbial clades dominate the planktonic marine niche, the dataset contains great
          diversity with 85% of the assembled sequence and 57% of the unassembled data being unique
          at a 98% sequence identity cutoff. Using the metadata associated with each sample and
          sequencing library, we developed new comparative genomic and assembly methods. One
          comparative genomic method, termed “fragment recruitment,” addressed questions of genome
          structure, evolution, and taxonomic or phylogenetic diversity, as well as the biochemical
          diversity of genes and gene families. A second method, termed “extreme assembly,” made
          possible the assembly and reconstruction of large segments of abundant but clearly
          nonclonal organisms. Within all abundant populations analyzed, we found extensive
          intra-ribotype diversity in several forms: (1) extensive sequence variation within
          orthologous regions throughout a given genome; despite coverage of individual ribotypes
          approaching 500-fold, most individual sequencing reads are unique; (2) numerous changes in
          gene content some with direct adaptive implications; and (3) hypervariable genomic islands
          that are too variable to assemble. The intra-ribotype diversity is organized into
          genetically isolated populations that have overlapping but independent distributions,
          implying distinct environmental preference. We present novel methods for measuring the
          genomic similarity between metagenomic samples and show how they may be grouped into
          several community types. Specific functional adaptations can be identified both within
          individual ribotypes and across the entire community, including proteorhodopsin spectral
          tuning and the presence or absence of the phosphate-binding gene
          PstS.
